Creation of Diversity tutorial (#4282)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/metagenomics/tutorials/diversity/tutorial.md

Related to ecology, the term **diversity** describes the number of different species present in one particular area and their relative abundance. More specifically, several different metrics of diversity can be calculated. The most common ones are α, β and γ diversity:

- **α diversity** describes the diversity within a community

    It considers the number of different species in an environment (also referred to as species **richness**). Additionally, it can take the abundance of each species into account to measure how evenly individuals are distributed across the sample (also referred to as species **evenness**). 

- **β diversity** measures the distance between two or more separate entities

    It therefore describes the difference between two communities or ecosystems.

- **γ diversity** is a measure of the overall diversity for the different ecosystems within a region.

    ![α, β and γ diversity](./images/diversity_differences.png)
  

> In this analysis we will use Galaxy for calculating the Shannon's alpha diversity index and the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index for β diversity. 

Author: different alpha diversity indexes and the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index for β diversity

The datafiles are named according to the first four characters of the filenames.

Originally, it was a collection of paired-end data with R1 being the forward reads and R2 being the reverse reads. The samples have than been analysed as explained in the [Taxonomic profiling tutorial]({% link topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/taxonomic-profiling/tutorial.md %}).

In a nutshell, taxonomic labels have been assigned to the metagenomics data using [Kraken2](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/kraken2/kraken2/2.1.1+galaxy1) to find out which species are present in the samples. Finally, species abundance was estimated using [Bracken](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/bracken/est_abundance/2.7+galaxy1). For this tutorial, we will use the output file of Bracken.

> Here, to get an overview, you can find a Krona chart visualizing the different species present in the two samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get an overview, you can find a Krona chart visualizing the different species present in the two samples.
```

<iframe id="krona" src="krona-kraken.html" frameBorder="0" width="100%" height="900px"> ![Krona chart with multi-layered pie chart representing the community profile with in the center the higher taxonomy levels (i.e. domain) and on the exterior the more detailed ones (i.e. species)](./images/krona-kraken.png) </iframe>

The dataset we will work with in this tutorial is the output file of Bracken, which estimates species abundance.

> ![Output file of Bracken](./images/bracken_output.png)

Author: just the text like this or format into a markdown table?

Having a closer look at the Bracken output file, you find a table with seven columns:

 1. species name
 2. taxonomy ID
 3. taxonomic level: K_kingdom, P_phylum, C_class, O_order, F_family, G_genus, and S_species
 4. reads assigned by Kraken

>  5. additional reads added by Bracken: In order to estimate species abundance, Bracken reestimates the reads assigned by Kraken to improve the result. For details on the procedure, have a look into the [Bracken publication](https://peerj.com/articles/cs-104/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 5. additional reads added by Bracken: In order to estimate species abundance, Bracken reestimates the reads assigned by Kraken using bayesian reestimation. For details on the procedure, have a look into the [Bracken publication](https://peerj.com/articles/cs-104/).
```
It does not really improve the results

>
> 1. Create a new history for this analysis
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_create_new.md %}
>
> 2. Rename the history
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_rename.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

We need now to import the data

> <hands-on-title>Import datasets</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Import the following samples via link from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) or Galaxy shared data libraries:
>
>    ```text
>    {{ page.zenodo_link }}/files/xxx
>    {{ page.zenodo_link }}/files/xxx
>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}
>
> 2. Create a paired collection.
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/collections_build_list_paired.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

# Calculating α diversity

**α diversity** describes the diversity within a community. There are several different indexes used to calculate α diversity because different indexes capture different aspects of diversity and have varying sensitivities to different factors. These indexes have been developed to address specific research questions, account for different ecological or population characteristics, or highlight certain aspects of diversity. 

> ![α diversity](./images/alphadiversity_metrics.png)

Author: https://medium.com/pjtorres-high-gut-alpha-diversity-and-health/high-alpha-diversity-and-health-65e5eca7fa36

how do I properly cite images?

Metrics of alpha diversity can be grouped into different classes:
- **richness** indexes that estimate the quantity of distinct species within a sample
- **evenness** indexes that evaluate the relative abundances of species rather than their total count
- **diversity** indexes that incorporate both the relative abundances and total count of distinct species

> ![richness and evenness](./images/alpha_diversity_richness_evenness.png)

Author: ![alpha_diversity](https://github.com/galaxyproject/training-material/assets/105356774/66a965a4-c45a-474c-be6b-72ac9e082621)

> ![richness and evenness](./images/alpha_diversity_richness_evenness.png)

Author: should I add the svg instead png to the tutorial?

  $$ D = ∑<sub>i=1</sub><sup>S</sup> (n<sub>i</sub>/N)<sup>2</sup> $$
  
   ni is the number of individuals in species i, N = total number of individuals of all species, and ni/N = pi (proportion of individuals of species i), and S = species richness.
                                                                    
- **Inverse Simpons** index, which is the transformation of Simpsons index that increases with increasing diversity.                                                              
- **Fishers alpha** index, which describes the relationship between the number of species and the number of individuals in those species. Parametric index of diversity that assumes that the abundance of species follows a log series distribution ({% cite Fisher.1943 %}).

   $$ S\=a\*ln(1+n/a) $$
                                                               
   S is number of taxa, n is number of individuals and a is the Fisher's alpha.                                                                                                                                                                     

> **KrakenTools** is a suite of scripts designed to help Kraken users with downstream analysis of Kraken results. The Krakentool **Calculate alpha diversity** offers the possibility to calculate five different alpha diversity indexes:

Reviewer: The output of bracken consists of all taxonomic levels: K_kingdom, P_phylum, C_class, O_order, F_family, G_genus, and S_species ; hence the alpha diversity is also calculated using all that levels. In think in most cases, alpha diversity is defined as "generally based on the number and relative abundance of taxa at some rank" ...maybe that could be explained as well.
Technically, one could add a filter step before krakentools to achieve that.

Reviewer: yes a detail box sounds good, still what I said applies for Kraken and Braken

1. Shannon's alpha diversity
2. Berger Parker's alpha
3. Simpson's diversity
4. Inverse Simpson's diversity
5. Fisher's index

> > <hands-on-title>Calculate α diversity with Krakentools</hands-on-title>

Reviewer: One could actually use `Calculate α diversity with Krakentools` for any tool that outputs taxonomy abundances, provided one converts it into the correct table format i.e. assigning column 5 as the abundance, in fact that would for any population data, maybe that could be addressed, since it would allow the usage in a more generic setting.

> <details-title>More details on Multidimensional diversity metrics and Parameter q</details-title>
> 
> ## Multidimensional diversity metrics and Parameter q
>
> Expressing the compositional complexity of an assemblage cannot be accomplished with a single numerical value. Traditional measures like diversities (Hill numbers) and entropies (Rényi entropies) vary in their **order q**, which determines **the extent to which rare or common species are emphasized**. The ranking and comparison of assemblages rely on the chosen value of q. 
>
> Instead of selecting a few measures to describe an assemblage, it is preferable to **present a continuous profile** that depicts diversity or entropy as a function of q (where q ≥ 0). This approach enables a visual comparison of the compositional complexities among multiple assemblages and facilitates the assessment of the evenness in the relative abundance distributions of the assemblages. In practice, the profile is typically plotted for values of q ranging from 0 to q = 3 or 4, beyond which there is usually little change.
>
> ![Parameter q](./images/hill_numbers.png)

> > https://www.redalyc.org/journal/5117/511766773011/html/

Author: thats the source of the image
